*Notes Taken From: Fundamentals Of Data Engineering* - Joe Reis & Matt Housley

Data architecture is the design of systems to support the evolving data needs of an enterprise, achieved by flexible and reversible decisions reached through a careful evaluation of trade-offs.
Data engineering architecture is the systems and frameworks that make up the key sections of the data engineering lifecycle.Good data architecture serves business requirements with a common, widely reusable set of building blocks while maintaining flexibility and making appropriate trade-offs.


==***1. Principles of Good Data Architecture?***==

*The AWS Well-Architected Framework consists of six pillars:*
• Operational excellence
• Security
• Reliability
• Performance efficiency
• Cost optimization
• Sustainability

*Google Cloud’s Five Principles for Cloud-Native Architecture are as follows:*
• Design for automation.
• Be smart with state.
• Favour managed services.
• Practice security in depth.
• Always be architecting.

*General Pillars For Data Engineering:*
1. Choose common components wisely:
	- Common components can be anything that has broad applicability within an organization. Common components include object storage, version-control systems, observability, monitoring and orchestration systems, and processing engines. Common components should be accessible to everyone with an appropriate use case, and teams are encouraged to rely on common components already in use rather than reinventing the wheel. Common components must support robust permissions and security to enable sharing of assets among teams while preventing unauthorized access.
	
	- Cloud platforms are an ideal place to adopt common components. For example, compute and storage separation in cloud data systems allows users to access a shared storage layer (most commonly object storage) using specialized tools to access and query the data needed for specific use cases.

2. Plan for failure:
	- Modern hardware is highly robust and durable. Even so, any hardware component will fail, given enough time. To build highly robust data systems, you must consider failures in your designs. Here are a few key terms for evaluating failure scenarios; we describe these in greater detail in this chapter and throughout the book:
		- Availability
		- Reliability
		- Recovery time objective
		- Recovery point objective

3. Architect for scalability.
	- Scalability in data systems encompasses two main capabilities. First, scalable systems can scale up to handle significant quantities of data. We might need to spin up a large cluster to train a model on a petabyte of customer data or scale out a streaming ingestion system to handle a transient load spike. Our ability to scale up allows us to handle extreme loads temporarily. Second, scalable systems can scale down. Once the load spike ebbs, we should automatically remove capacity to cut costs.

4. Architecture is leadership.
	- An ideal data architect manifests similar characteristics. They possess the technical skills of a data engineer but no longer practice data engineering day to day; they mentor current data engineers, make careful technology choices in consultation with their organization, and disseminate expertise through training and leadership. They train engineers in best practices and bring the company’s engineering resources together to pursue common goals in both technology and business. As a data engineer, you should practice architecture leadership and seek mentorship from architects. Eventually, you may well occupy the architect role yourself.
	
5. Always be architecting.
	- Data architects don’t serve in their role simply to maintain the existing state; instead, they constantly design new and exciting things in response to changes in business and technology.

6. Build loosely coupled systems.
	- When the architecture of the system is designed to enable teams to test, deploy, and change systems without dependencies on other teams, teams require little communication to get work done. In other words, both the architecture and the teams are loosely coupled.
	
7. Make reversible decisions.
	- The data landscape is changing rapidly. Today’s hot technology or stack is tomorrow’s afterthought. Popular opinion shifts quickly. You should aim for reversible decisions, as these tend to simplify your architecture and keep it agile. As we said previously, Bezos refers to reversible decisions as “two-way doors.” As he says, “If you walk through and don’t like what you see on the other side, you can’t get back to before. We can call these Type 1 decisions. But most decisions aren’t like that—they are changeable, reversible—they’re two-way doors.” Aim for two-way doors whenever possible.
	
8. Prioritize security.
9. Embrace FinOps.


==***2. Examples Of Data Architecture?***==

Data Warehouse:
- Is a centralized repository that stores structured data (database tables, Excel sheets) and semi-structured data (XML files, webpages) for the purposes of reporting and analysis. The data flows in from a variety of sources, such as point-of-sale systems, business applications, and relational databases, and it is usually cleaned and standardized before it hits the warehouse. 
- Example: TD EDW, Stores all types of databases, tables, raw data, etc...

Data Mart:
- is a focused version of a data warehouse that contains a smaller subset of data important to and needed by a single team or a select group of users within an organization. A data mart is built from an existing data warehouse (or other data sources).

Data Lake:
- provides massive storage of unstructured or raw data fed via multiple sources, but the information has not yet been processed or prepared for analysis. As a result of being able to store data in a raw format, data lakes are more accessible and cost-effective than data warehouses.

- Example: Governments can use technology to track data on traffic behaviour, power usage, and waterways, and store it in a data lake while they figure out how to use the data

